Lab 05 Concurrency.md, before:

# Exercise 1: Transaction

## Step 1: Create a lock

- Start SQL Server Management Studio
- Connect to the Server North 

* Open three query windows
* In window 1

```sql
USE AdventureWorks
BEGIN TRAN
	UPDATE Person.Person
	SET LastName='Andersson'
	WHERE BusinessEntityID=1
```
* In window 2

```sql
USE AdventureWorks
  SELECT * FROM Person.Person WHERE BusinessEntityID=1
```

## Step 2: Examine the lock using sp_who2
* In window 3

```sql
EXEC sp_who2
```

Identify the suspended (blocked) query and the blocking query

## Step 3: Examine the lock using sp_whoisactive

* Download and install sp_whoisactive from https://github.com/roblevay/T1987/Files
* Open a new query window and run 

```sql
EXEC sp_whoisactive
```

Identify the suspended (blocked) query and the blocking query

## Step 4: Examine the lock using sp_blitzlock

* Download and install sp_blitzlock from https://github.com/roblevay/T1987/Files
* Open a new query window and run 

```sql
EXEC sp_whoisactive
```

Identify the suspended (blocked) query and the blocking query

Commit message:

Revise Exercise 1 title and update sp_blitzlock to sp_blitzwho

Lab 05 Concurrency.md, after:

# Exercise 1: Transactions and locks

## Step 1: Create a lock

- Start SQL Server Management Studio
- Connect to the Server North 

* Open three query windows
* In window 1

```sql
USE AdventureWorks
BEGIN TRAN
	UPDATE Person.Person
	SET LastName='Andersson'
	WHERE BusinessEntityID=1
```
* In window 2

```sql
USE AdventureWorks
  SELECT * FROM Person.Person WHERE BusinessEntityID=1
```

## Step 2: Examine the lock using sp_who2
* In window 3

```sql
EXEC sp_who2
```

Identify the suspended (blocked) query and the blocking query

## Step 3: Examine the lock using sp_whoisactive

* Download and install sp_whoisactive from https://github.com/roblevay/T1987/Files
* Open a new query window and run 

```sql
EXEC sp_whoisactive
```

Identify the suspended (blocked) query and the blocking query

## Step 4: Examine the lock using sp_blitzwho

* Download and install sp_blitzwho from https://github.com/roblevay/T1987/Files
* Open a new query window and run 

```sql
EXEC sp_blitzwho
```

Identify the suspended (blocked) query and the blocking query
